spec: Add mempool specification in English and Quint (#997)
cometbft/cometbft: spec/mempool/mempool.md

# Mempool

In this document, we define the notion of **mempool** and characterize its role in the **CometBFT** protocol.
First, we provide an overview of what is a mempool, and relates it to other blockchains.
Then, the interactions with the consensus and client application are detailed.
A formalization of the mempool follows.
This formalization is readable in Quint [here](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/spec/mempool/quint).

## Overview

The mempool acts as an entry point to consensus.

> It permits to disseminate transactions from one node to another, for their eventual inclusion in the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It permits to disseminate transactions from one node to another, for their eventual inclusion into a block.
```

To this end, the mempool maintains a replicated set, or _pool_, of transactions.
Transactions in the mempool are consumed by consensus to create the next proposed block.
The mempool is refreshed once a new block in the blockchain  is decided.

> A transaction can be received from a local client, or a remote disseminating process.

Author: I am using already the terms "process" and "node". So, using "peer" in addition would complexity things.

> Each transaction is subject to a test by the client application.

Reviewer: The use of the term client is confusing here. Not sure what is meant with "local client". I guess "client application" should be "ABCI application"?

Author: I added such a precision.

This test verifies that the transaction is _valid_.
Such a test provides some form of protection against byzantine agents, whether they be clients or other system nodes.
It also serves to optimize the overall utility of the blockchain.
Validity can be simply syntactical which is stateless, or a more complex verification that is state-dependent.
If the transaction is valid, the local process further propagates it in the system using a gossip (or an anti-entropy) mechanism.

_In other blockchains._

> The notion of mempool appears in all blockchains, but with varying definitions and/or implementations.

Author: Did so. Thanks!

For instance in Ethereum, the mempool contains two types of transactions: processable and pending ones.
To be pending, a transactions must first succeed in a series of tests.
Some of these tests are [syntactic](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/281e8cd5abaac86ed3f37f98250ff147b3c9fe62/core/txpool/txpool.go#L581) ones (e.g., valid source address), while [others](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/281e8cd5abaac86ed3f37f98250ff147b3c9fe62/core/txpool/txpool.go#L602) are state-dependent (e.g., enough gas, at most one pending transactions per address, etc).

> [Narwhal](https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.11827.pdf) is the mempool abstraction for the Tusk and [Bullshark](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.05677) protocols.

Author: I prefer to keep the sentence in the same paragraph.

It provides strong global guarantees.
In particular, once a transaction is added to the mempool, it is guaranteed to be available at any later point in time.

## Interactions

In what follows, we present the interactions of the mempool with other parts of the CometBFT protocol.
Some of the specificities of the current implementation (`CListMempool`) are also detailed.

**RPC server**

> To add a new transaction to the mempool, a clients may submit it through an appropriate RPC endpoint.

Author: Fixed.

This endpoint is offered by some of the system nodes (but not necessarily all of them).

**Gossip protocol** 
Transactions can also be received from other nodes, through a gossiping mechanism.

**ABCI application**

> As pointed above, the mempool should only store and disseminate  valid transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As pointed out above, the mempool should only store and disseminate  valid transactions.
```

It is up to the ABCI (client) application to define whether a transaction is valid.
Transactions received locally are sent to the application to be validated, through the `checkTx` method from the mempool ABCI connection.
Such a check indicates with a flag whether it is the first time (or not) that the transaction is received.
Transactions that are validated by the application are later added to the mempool.
Transactions tagged as invalid are simply drooped.
The validity of a transaction may depend on the state of the client application.

> In particular, some transactions that are valid in some state of the application may later become invalid.

Author: I think this is a bit early. This point is detailed later.

The state of the application is updated when consensus commits a block of transactions.
When this happens, the transactions still in the mempool have to be validated again.
We further detail this mechanism below.

**Consensus**
The consensus protocol consumes transactions stored in the mempool to build blocks to be proposed.

> To this end, consensus requests from the mempool a list of transactions which abide by certain limits (namely, total number of transactions included, or total size in bytes).

Reviewer: I guess it makes sense to do this change. Is this OK for you @otrack ?

In the current implementation, the mempool is a list of transactions.
Such a call returns the longest prefix of the list that is matching the requirements.
Notice that at this point the transactions returned to consensus are not removed from the mempool.
This comes from the fact that the block is proposed but not decided yet.

Proposing a block is the prerogative of the nodes acting as validators.
At all the nodes (validators or not), consensus is also responsible for committing blocks of transactions to the blockchain.
Once a block is committed, all the transactions included in the block are removed from the mempool.
This happens with an `update` call to the mempool.
Before doing this call, consensus takes a `lock` on the mempool.
It then `flush` the connection with the client application.

> Both operations aim at preventing any concurrent `checkTx` while the mempool is updated.

Author: Added.

At the end of `update`, all the transactions still in the mempool are re-validated against the new state of the client application.

> This procedure is executed asynchronously with a call to `recheckTxs`.

Reviewer 2: To be more precise, sending re-CheckTx requests with `recheckTxs` happens at the end of `Update`. Processing the responses happens asynchronously.

Finally, consensus removes its lock on the mempool by issuing a call to `unlock`.

## Formalization

In what follows, we formalize the notion of mempool.
To this end, we first provide a (brief) definition of what is a ledger, that is a replicated log of transactions.
At a process $p$, we shall write $p.var$ the local variable $var$ at $p$.

**Ledger.**
We use the standard definition of (BFT) SMR in the context of blockchain, where each process $p$ has a ledger, written $p.ledger$.
At process $p$, the $i$-th entry of the ledger is denoted $p.ledger[i]$.
This entry contains either a null value ($\bot$), or a set of transactions, aka., a block.
The height of the ledger at $p$ is the index of the first null entry; denoted $p.height$.
Operation $submit(txs, i)$ attempts to write the set of transactions $txs$ to the $i$-th entry of the ledger.
The (history) variable $p.submitted[i]$ holds all the transactions (if any) submitted by $p$ at height $i$.
By extension, $p.submitted$ are all the transaction submitted by $p$.
A transaction is committed when it appears in one of the entries of the ledger.

> We write $p.committed$ the committed transactions at $p$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We denote by $p.committed$ the committed transactions at $p$.
```

As standard, the ledger ensures that:  
* _(Gap-freedom)_ There is no gap between two entries at a correct process:  
$\forall i \in 	\mathbb{N}. \forall p \in Correct. \square(p.ledger[i] \neq \bot \implies (i=0 \vee p.ledger[i-1] \neq \bot))$;  
* _(Agreement)_ No two correct processes have different ledger entries; formally:  
$\forall i \in 	\mathbb{N}. \forall p,q \in Correct. \square((p.ledger[i] = \bot) \vee (q.ledger[i] = \bot) \vee (p.ledger[i] = q.ledger[i]))$;  
* _(Validity)_ If some transaction appears at an index $i$ at a correct process, then a process submitted it at that index:  
$\forall p \in Correct. \exists q \in Processes. \forall i \in 	\mathbb{N}. \square(tx \in p.ledger[i] \implies tx \in \bigcup_q q.submitted[i]$).

> * _(Termination)_ If a correct process submits a block at its current height, eventually its height get incremented:  

Author: The operation `submit` is defined in terms of blocks, which are set of transactions.

$\forall p \in Correct. \square((h=p.height \wedge p.submitted[h] \neq \varnothing) \implies \lozenge(p.height>h))$  

**Mempool.**
A mempool is a replicated set of transactions.
At a process $p$, we write it $p.mempool$.
We also define $p.hmempool$, the (history) variable that tracks all the transactions ever added to the mempool by process $p$.
Below, we list the invariants of the mempool (at a correct process).

> The mempool is used as an input for the ledger:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the mempool is used as an input for the ledger:  
```
Not 100% sure about this change, but I guess that is the intention?

Author: Yes, this is the intention.

**INV1.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.submitted \implies tx \in p.hmempool)$

Committed transactions are not in the mempool:  

> **INV2.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.committed \implies tx \notin p.mempool)$

Reviewer: I guess this imposes atomicity of committing a transaction and removing it from the mempool. I guess it is OK for a high-level spec but perhaps we should add a discussion about that. 

Also perhaps it makes sense to point out that this is a property local to process p, while two correct processes may still have different perceptions about tx at a given point in time.

In blockchain, a transaction is (or not) valid in a given state.
That is, a transaction can be valid (or not) at a given height of the ledger.
To model this, consider a transaction $tx$.
Let $p.ledger.valid(tx)$ be such a check at the current height of the ledger at process $p$ (ABCI call).
Our third invariant is that only valid transactions are present in the mempool:  

> **INV3.** $\forall tx, \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.mempool \implies p.ledger.valid(tx))$

Reviewer: There is also some atomicity requirement. Whenever a block is appended, a transaction may be invalidated by that. This assumes that p immediately removes tx from the mempool. Again, for the high level spec this is OK, but in the implementation removal of the mempool may be delayed, I guess?

Author: Yes, the current implementation is executing the removal asynchronously.

A simple way to satisfy this for the programmer is by having $valid(tx)$ deterministic and stateless (e.g., a syntactic check).

**Practical considerations.**
In practice, as it requires to traverse the whole ledger, INV2 is too expensive.
Instead, we would like to maintain this only over the last $\alpha$ committed transactions, for some parameter $\alpha$.
Given a process $p$, we write $p.lcommitted$ the last $\alpha$ committed transactions at $p$.
Invariant INV2 is replaced with:  
**INV2a.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.lcommitted \implies tx \notin p.mempool)$

Another practical concern is with INV3.
This invariant requires to have a green light from the client application before adding a transaction to the mempool.
For efficiency, such a validation needs to be made at most $\beta$ times per transaction at each height, for some parameter $\beta$.
Ideally, $\beta$ equals $1$.
In practice, $\beta = f(T)$ for some function f of the maximal number of transactions T submitted between two heights.

> Given some transaction $tx$, variable $p.valid[tx]$ tracks the number of times the application was asked at the current height.

Reviewer 3: since valid is already used in the ledger, maybe rename it

```suggestion
Given some transaction $tx$, variable $p.checks[tx]$ tracks the number of times the application was asked at the current height.
```

Author: I believe it is best to use the same word since we track the same thing, that is $ledger.valid(tx)` \implies p.valid[tx] > 0$

> Invariant INV3 is replaced with:  

Reviewer 3: I don't understand why "replaced". In my mind they should be complementary. The transaction should be in the mempool if the previous check succeeded and the number of checks is limited.

Author: Thanks for point out this. The sentence was a bit unclear. It now reads: "A weaker version of INV3 is as follows: " 

INV3a is weaker than INV3 because we want to validate each transaction (at a given height) at most once. However, this requires to store possibly a very large map. Insted we use a bounded  (LRU) cache. 

Notice that INV2a and INV3 grasp the role of the `cache` variable in `clist_mempool.go`.

**INV3a.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.hmempool \implies p.valid[tx] \in [1, \beta])$

> For further information regarding the current implementation of the mempool in CometBFT, the reader may consult [this](https://github.com/cometbft/knowledge-base/blob/main/protocols/mempool/v0/mempool-v0.md) document in the knowledger base.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For further information regarding the current implementation of the mempool in CometBFT, the reader may consult [this](https://github.com/cometbft/knowledge-base/blob/main/protocols/mempool/v0/mempool-v0.md) document in the knowledge base.
```

# Mempool

In this document, we define the notion of **mempool** and characterize its role in the **CometBFT** protocol.
First, we provide an overview of what is a mempool, and relate it to other blockchains.
Then, the interactions with the consensus and client application are detailed.
A formalization of the mempool follows.
This formalization is readable in Quint [here](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/blob/main/spec/mempool/quint).

## Overview

The mempool acts as an entry point to consensus.
It permits to disseminate transactions from one node to another, for their eventual inclusion into a block.
To this end, the mempool maintains a replicated set, or _pool_, of transactions.
Transactions in the mempool are consumed by consensus to create the next proposed block.
Once a new block in the blockchain is decided, the mempool is refreshed.
We shall detail how shortly.

> A transaction can be received from a local client (through the ABCI interface), or a remote disseminating process.

Author: The sentence was misleading. I removed the reference to the ABCI interface here.

When this happens, the transactions still in the mempool have to be validated again.
We further detail this mechanism below.

**Consensus**
The consensus protocol consumes transactions stored in the mempool to build blocks to be proposed.
To this end, consensus requests from the mempool a list of transactions.
A limit on the total number of bytes, or transactions, _may_ be specified.
In the current implementation, the mempool is stored as a list of transactions.
The call returns the longest prefix of the list that matches the imposed limits.
Notice that at this point the transactions returned to consensus are not removed from the mempool.
This comes from the fact that the block is proposed but not decided yet.

Proposing a block is the prerogative of the nodes acting as validators.
At all the full nodes (validators or not), consensus is responsible for committing blocks of transactions to the blockchain.
Once a block is committed, all the transactions included in the block are removed from the mempool.
This happens with an `update` call to the mempool.
Before doing this call, consensus takes a `lock` on the mempool.

> It then `flush` the connection with the client application.

Author: It is about consensus. I chantged this for CometBFT.

Another practical concern is that INV2 requires to traverse the whole ledger, which might be too expensive.
Instead, we would like to maintain this only over the last $\alpha$ committed transactions, for some parameter $\alpha$.
Given a process $p$, we write $p.lcommitted$ the last $\alpha$ committed transactions at $p$.
Invariant INV2 is replaced with:  
**INV2a.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.lcommitted \implies tx \notin p.mempool)$

INV3 requires to have a green light from the client application before adding a transaction to the mempool.
For efficiency, such a validation needs to be made at most $\beta$ times per transaction at each height, for some parameter $\beta$.
Ideally, $\beta$ equals $1$.
In practice, $\beta = f(T)$ for some function $f$ of the maximal number of transactions $T$ submitted between two heights.
Given some transaction $tx$, variable $p.valid[tx]$ tracks the number of times the application was asked at the current height.
A weaker version of INV3 is as follows:  
**INV3a.** $\forall tx. \forall p \in Correct. \square(tx \in p.hmempool \implies p.valid[tx] \in [1, \beta])$

> For further information regarding the current implementation of the mempool in CometBFT, the reader may consult [this](https://github.com/cometbft/knowledge-base/blob/main/protocols/mempool/v0/mempool-v0.md) document in the knowledge base.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> For further information regarding the current implementation of the mempool in CometBFT, the reader may consult [this](https://github.com/cometbft/knowledge-base/blob/main/protocols/mempool/v0/mempool-v0.md) document in the knowledge base.
```
